---
layout: post
title:  "Do I need onboard remote developers?"
date:   2016-07-01 13:37:10 +0200
categories: craftsmanship remote working onboarding
---

There is a main rule in all remote working companies - they have to be prepared for such enormous and exhausting effort which is reducing cost and hiring the best of the bests around the globe. It isn't an easy task at all. Still many companies simply don't know how to effectively manage people that are working from home and how to measure this effectiveness.

# Problem: people are too lazy to work at home

Most of the thoughts I am a direct victim are rather simple - programmer cannot work at home. Why? Because they are lazy bitches with desire of having money and spending it on some fucking lava lamps or games. I don't have to explain how much I disagree. Firstly because of that really good developers are working for fun and money is a side effect, however important but not that. Why? I am choosing my clients regarding to salary of course. But I have never picked up some other job than software development even if I would have so much money that I don't have to pick anything at all. Its exactly the same what I am doing now so please don't tell me that I don't care about software development. I am sure that majority of developers that I had pleasure to work with have those same thoughts.
Well, anyone could probably find an example that proves humans are not able to work at home. I am pretty sure that will contain an environmental cause like crying child, cat or dog, or attractive distractions like video games or doing whatever he/she can besides of working. Yes, there might be a lot of those people but still it should sound reasonable that there a lot of *professionalists* that are really working within their remote environments and do it damn good. No distractions, no kids, working at even better than office's environment. Being a part of working remotely people I want to share some common good practices that allows companies to hire more and more remote developers with having also own on site. The reason I am writing this is that I saw already companies that are not ready to do this in a short period on time, especially when getting more than couple of them at once. I will explain those problems with minimal amount of words (I guess).
Still, if you will decide to hire someone that will work far away from your office, then where you should start? THE ONBOARDING of course! You have some options, regarding to your company possibilities, budgets and security policies.

# Onboarding with temporary on site placement

That’s interesting and common practice which allows employers ask future remote developers to come directly into facility that will lead or be main participant in project. During this time developer should gain all accesses to internal tools and systems, learn how to report work time or other procedures that cannot be easily explained through remote communication. Usually it should take two days maximum. If you cannot deliver in shorter time better review the content of such process. Otherwise, you are loosing too much money and developer’s time.  I am sure that any company can do this in this time (think about deferring trainings and move to some e-platform). Remember, onboarding people wouldn’t be disposable. Its ongoing process that might happen many many times - especially you or your department is growing. The second thing that developer should know is the team. Meeting live organisms makes remote communication more effective and direct. Set up some unofficial meeting after hours (not necessarily with alcohol) to get know each other, it is really possible that people would appreciate this. Otherwise, you are a really asshole as a manager.  Or worse :) You should focus on communication channel that will replace usual chatting at office. Skype conversation or even some voice chat might be very, very useful here. It should not  be official, or even project related. Make a place where people can talk about all things. Don’t worry, they would not spend all day chatting, and even they will, you will receive an information that you hired wrong people. Anyway, you have to create chats regarding to project or technology that is used. Remember, you have to trace chats to be up-to-date what developers are complaining on or what problems they have. Still, you don't have to be an asshole and complain about their language or other shit they can said there. Remember - chat place, don't expect too much.

# Onboarding 100% remotely

Oh, so you hired abroad developers? That might be problematic regarding to having no time to get them onsite even for a day. Don’t plan them a calls that will take ages. Create a one document where step-by-step they can get all accesses and knowledge how to work for you, what are the standards and so on.  It might look expensive, however it won’t require your current workers to make a long meetings. You can assess that they read all documents - by test or something similar.

